\input texinfo
@setfilename nixos-apple-silicon-manual
@settitle NixOS Apple Silicon
@set VERSION release-2025-11-18
@set DEVELOPMENT
@set FORGE_URL https://github.com/nix-community/nixos-apple-silicon
@set MAINTAINERS @@tpwrules, @@flokli, @@yuyuyureka
@set BUG_TRACKER @url{https://github.com/nix-community/nixos-apple-silicon/issues, Bug Tracker}
@set RELEASES_MIRROR @url{https://github.com/nix-community/nixos-apple-silicon/releases, GitHub Releases}
@set LINUX_VERSION asahi-6.17.7-2
@set M1N1_VERSION v1.5.2
@set UBOOT_VERSION asahi-v2025.07-1
@set NIXPKGS_DATE 2025-11-12

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2021-2025 Thomas Watson@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2023 Alexandra Reaves@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2023 Patrick Stevens@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2023 uuuvn@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2023 Isabella Skořepová@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2024 Fabian Page@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2024-2025 Florian Klink@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2025 Yureka@*
Copyright @copyright{} 2025 Jasi@*

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
"Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
@end copying

@titlepage
@title NixOS Apple Silicon Manual
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@paragraphindent 0

@contents

@node Top
@top NixOS Apple Silicon

This manual explains how to install and maintain a NixOS system on
Apple Silicon hardware.

The version of the manual you are reading is @value{VERSION}

@ifset DEVELOPMENT
@quotation Note
This is a development version of this manual and may not be accurate
to the latest tagged release (@value{VERSION}).
@end quotation
@end ifset

@menu
* Installation::            Installing NixOS Apple Silicon
* Upgrading::               Upgrading the NixOS support module
* Rescue::                  Rescue the system from a un-workable state
* Un-installation::         Un-install nixos-apple-silicon
* Binary cache::            Additional cache to support builds
* Release model/process::   How new releases are made
* Release Notes::           Release changelogs
* Copying::                 Copying and distributing this manual
@end menu

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

This guide will explain how to install NixOS on the internal NVMe
drive of an Apple Silicon Mac using a customized version of the
official NixOS install ISO, then boot it without the help of another
computer. Aside from the Apple Silicon support module and AArch64 CPU,
the resulting installation can be configured and operated like any
other NixOS system. Your macOS install will still work normally, and
you can easily switch between booting both macOS and NixOS.

@node Requirements

@nodedescriptionblock
Required software for installation
@end nodedescriptionblock

@section Requirements

This guide was tested with the following software releases:

@multitable @columnfractions .60 .40

@headitem Project @tab Release

@item @url{https://github.com/nix-community/nixos-apple-silicon, nixos-apple-silicon}
@tab @value{VERSION}

@item @url{https://github.com/AsahiLinux/linux, linux}
@tab @value{LINUX_VERSION}

@item @url{https://github.com/AsahiLinux/m1n1, m1n1}
@tab @value{M1N1_VERSION}

@item @url{https://github.com/AsahiLinux/u-boot, u-boot}
@tab @value{UBOOT_VERSION}

@item @url{https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs, nixpkgs}
@tab As of @value{NIXPKGS_DATE}

@item MacOS
@tab >13.5

@end multitable

The following items are required to get started:

@itemize

@item
Apple Silicon Mac
@url{https://github.com/AsahiLinux/docs/wiki/Feature-Support#table-of-contents,
supported by Asahi Linux} with macOS 13.5 or later and an admin
account
@item
For Mac mini users: tested and working HDMI monitor. Many do not work
properly; if it shows the Asahi Linux logo and console when m1n1 is
running, it's fine.
@item
USB flash drive which is at least 512MB and can be fully erased
@item
Familiarity with the command line and installers without GUIs
@item
Optional: an x86_64 or aarch64 Linux PC or VM (any distro is fine)
@end itemize

@node Considerations

@nodedescriptionblock
Some considerations to have in mind when choosing to install
@end nodedescriptionblock

@section Considerations

Damage to the macOS recovery partitions or the partition table could
result in the Mac becoming unbootable and loss of all data on the
internal NVMe drive. In this circumstance, a suitable USB cable and
another computer which can run
@url{https://github.com/libimobiledevice/idevicerestore,idevicerestore}
will be required to perform a DFU upgrade and restore normal
operation. Backups are always wise.

While you will end up with a reasonably usable computer, the exact
hardware features you want may not be ready yet (see
@url{https://github.com/AsahiLinux/docs/wiki/%22When-will-Asahi-Linux-be-done%3F%22,
``When will Asahi Linux be done?''})

Please also see
@url{https://github.com/AsahiLinux/docs/wiki/Feature-Support, Asahi
Linux Feature Support} information. Any features marked with a kernel
version or `linux-asahi` should be supported by NixOS too.

@node Obtaining the ISO

@nodedescriptionblock
How to either build or obtain an installation ISO to install NixOS
@end nodedescriptionblock

@section Obtaining the ISO

There are multiple ways to obtain an installation ISO, either from
downloading a pre-built version or building one yourself from source
using Nix. This guide goes over both ways.

@quotation Note
If the installed NixOS version matches the version used by the
installer (the default if not using flakes), and if the installer has
not been cross-compiled (the default for official releases), the
kernel will be copied over from the installer. Otherwise, the system
will attempt to build the kernel in the installer environment which is
generally not possible due to memory limitations. If the system will
not install due to this, consider enabling the binary cache
(@xref{Binary cache}), changing nixpkgs versions temporarily, or
building/downloading a machine-native installer
@end quotation

@subsection Downloading the ISO directly

You can download a pre-built installation ISO from the NixOS Apple
Silicon project using @value{RELEASES_MIRROR} which includes the
corresponding SHA256 hash for verification.

The caveat is that customization of the installation ISO is not
possible so if you need a tool not covered by the
@code{iso-configuration} directory or need an ISO built from the
development branch, then building the ISO is preferable.

@subsection Building the ISO directly

If you have flakes enabled in your Nix installation: you can easily
build an installation ISO through this one liner:

@example
nix build github:nix-community/nixos-apple-silicon/release-2025-08-23#installer-bootstrap \
          -o installer
@end example

The resulting installation ISO will be located in
@file{installer/iso/nixos-<version-info>-aarch64-linux.iso} and can be
burned onto an USB drive.

@subsection From source

Building from source currently requires flakes to be used. A
@code{git} installation is also required for cloning.

First clone the repository onto your local system and checkout the
appropriate release (you may also choose to build directly from the
@emph{main} branch which may include things not covered by this
guide).

@example
git clone @value{FORGE_URL}
cd nixos-apple-silicon
git checkout @value{VERSION}
@end example

The configuration for the ISO is located in
@file{iso-configuration/installer-configuration.nix} and can be edited
to include additional tools and settings not already included.

To build the ISO with build logs:
@example
nix build .#installer-bootstrap -o installer -L
@end example

The resulting installation ISO will be located in
@file{installer/iso/nixos-<version-info>-aarch64-linux.iso} and can be
burned onto an USB drive.

If you run into any errors during building, you can report it to the
@value{BUG_TRACKER}, please include the build logs as well which can be
retrieved with @code{nix log .#<pkg-name>}

@node UEFI Preparation
@nodedescriptionblock
Prepare MacOS for installation of a new operating system
@end nodedescriptionblock

@section UEFI Preparation

This setup uses the Asahi Linux installer to install a stub macOS and
standard UEFI boot environment from which the NixOS installer and
installed OS will run. These steps must be run from @code{Terminal.app} in
macOS. You must also be logged into an administrator account.

Download and run the installer using the following command which is
also available on the @url{https://asahilinux.org, Asahi project homepage}).

@example
curl https://alx.sh | sh
@end example

Choose the following options to get started:

@itemize @bullet{}
@item
Enter your administrator password.
@item
Do @strong{not} enable expert mode.
@item
Resize your existing MacOS installation:
@itemize @minus{}
@item
Resize an existing partition to make space for a new OS (press @code{r}).
@item
Enter the new size of the macOS install. It should be at least 20GB
less than its current size to make room for NixOS with a GUI (note
that here 1GB = 1,000,000,000 bytes).
@item Confirm the resize operation
@item
Wait patiently while the partition is resized; it will take several
minutes. Do not attempt to use the machine while this is in progress.
@end itemize
Press @code{enter} when finished.

@item
Install UEFI environment:
@itemize @minus{}
@item
Install an OS into free space (press @code{f}).
@item
Choose ``UEFI environment only''.
@item
Name it NixOS (this is what shows up in the firmware boot picker).
@item
Wait while the installation proceeds and enter your password when prompted.
@item
Wait for the default boot volume to be set (this may take several seconds).
@item
Read the final advice, then press @code{enter} to shut down the machine.
@end itemize
@end itemize

Boot into recovery mode by holding the power button down as directed
and select the new NixOS option in the boot picker. Follow the prompts
and enter your administrator password. The local policy update will
take several seconds to complete. Once complete, select that you want
to set a custom boot object and put your system to permissive security
mode, enter your administrator username (the same one you put in the
password for earlier) and password, then reboot when prompted.

If everything went well, you will restart into U-Boot with the Asahi
Linux and U-Boot logos on-screen. Shut the system down by holding the
power button, then proceed to the next step.


@node Boot into the installation
@nodedescriptionblock
Describes how to boot into the installation ISO
@end nodedescriptionblock
@section Boot into the installation

Shut down the machine fully. Connect the flash drive with the
installer ISO to a USB port (most likely using a USB-C adapter if
required).

Start the Mac, and U-Boot should start booting from the USB drive
automatically. If you've already installed something to the internal
NVMe drive, U-Boot will try to boot it first. To instead boot from
USB, hit a key to stop autoboot when prompted, then run the command
`bootmenu` and select the `usb 0` entry. If no entries are available,
exit and use `bootmenu -e` instead. If this command is not available,
instead use `setenv boot_targets "usb" ; setenv bootmeths "efi" ;
boot`. GRUB will start, then the NixOS installer after a short delay
(the default GRUB option is fine).

@subsection Troubleshooting

If you encounter @code{mounting `/dev/root` on `/mnt-root/iso`
failed: No such file or directory" during boot…"}

@enumerate
@item
Was the ISO transferred to your flash drive correctly as described
above? `dd` is the only correct way to do this. The ISO must be
transferred to the drive block device itself, not a partition on the
drive.
@item
There is sometimes a
@url{https://github.com/nix-community/nixos-apple-silicon/issues/60,
race condition} which causes booting to fail. Reboot the machine and
try again.
@item
Some flash drives have quirks. Try a different drive, or use the
following steps:
@enumerate
      @item Attempt to start the installer normally
      @item When the boot fails and you are prompted, hit i to start a shell
      @item Unplug your flash drive, plug it into a different port, then wait 30 seconds
      @item Run the command @code{mount -t iso9660 /dev/root /mnt-root/iso}
      @item Exit the shell by running `exit` to continue the boot process
@end enumerate
@end enumerate

You will get a console prompt once booting completes. Run the command
@code{sudo su} to get a root prompt in the installer. If the console font
is too small, run the command @code{setfont ter-v32n} to increase the size.

@subsection Network setup

If you're not using WiFi, connect the Ethernet cable to the network
port or adapter as well. If you are using WiFi, use @code{iwd} to
connect to it.

@example
nixos# iwctl
NetworkConfigurationEnabled: enabled
StateDirectory: /var/lib/iwd
Version: 2.4
[iwd]# station wlan0 scan
[iwd]# station wlan0 connect <SSID>
Type the network passphrase for <SSID> psk.
Passphrase: <your passphrase>
[iwd]# station wlan0 show
[...]
[iwd] exit
@end example

Once the network is set up, ensure the time is set correctly:

@example
systemctl restart systemd-timesyncd
@end example

@node Partitioning guide
@nodedescriptionblock
How to manually partition your disk without soft-bricking your device
@end nodedescriptionblock

@section Partitioning guide

@quotation Warning
Damage to the GPT partition table, first partition
(@code{iBootSystemContainer}), or the last partition
(@code{RecoveryOSContainer}) could result in the loss of all data and
render the Mac unbootable and unrecoverable without assistance from
another computer! Do not use your distro's automated partitioner or
partitioning instructions!

In short, don't use any automated partitioning tools (such as disko or
calamares) as it's very likely it will damage these partitions and
soft-brick your system, requiring you to go through a system rescue
(@xref{Rescue from boot failure with @code{idevicerestore}}).

@end quotation

@node Partition setup with @code{ext4}
@nodedescriptionblock
Partitioning walkthrough with a simple unencrypted @code{ext4}
@end nodedescriptionblock
@subsection Partition setup with @code{ext4}
We will add a root partition to the remaining free space and format it as ext4.

Create the root partition to fill up the free space:

@example
nixos# sgdisk /dev/nvme0n1 -n 0:0 -s
[...]
The operation has completed successfully.
@end example

Identify the number of the new root partition (type code 8300,
typically second to last):

@example
$ sgdisk /dev/nvme0n1 -p
Disk /dev/nvme0n1: 244276265 sectors, 931.8 GiB
Model: APPLE SSD AP1024Q
Sector size (logical/physical): 4096/4096 bytes
Disk identifier (GUID): 27054D2E-307A-41AA-9A8C-3864D56FAF6B
Partition table holds up to 128 entries
Main partition table begins at sector 2 and ends at sector 5
First usable sector is 6, last usable sector is 244276259
Partitions will be aligned on 1-sector boundaries
Total free space is 0 sectors (0 bytes)

Number  Start (sector)    End (sector)  Size       Code  Name
   1               6          128005   500.0 MiB   FFFF  iBootSystemContainer
   2          128006       219854567   838.2 GiB   AF0A  Container
   3       219854568       220465127   2.3 GiB     AF0A
   4       220465128       220590311   489.0 MiB   EF00
   5       220590312       242965550   85.4 GiB    8300
   6       242965551       244276259   5.0 GiB     FFFF  RecoveryOSContainer
@end example

Format the new root partition:

@example
mkfs.ext4 -L nixos /dev/nvme0n1p5
@end example

Mount the root partition, then the EFI system partition that was
created by the Asahi Linux installer specifically for NixOS:

@example
nixos# mount /dev/disk/by-label/nixos /mnt
nixos# mkdir -p /mnt/boot
nixos# mount /dev/disk/by-partuuid/`cat /proc/device-tree/chosen/asahi,efi-system-partition` /mnt/boot
@end example

@node Installing NixOS
@nodedescriptionblock
Installing NixOS from the booted system
@end nodedescriptionblock
@section Installing NixOS

Create a default configuration for the new system, then copy the Apple
Silicon support module into it:

@example
nixos# nixos-generate-config --root /mnt
nixos# cp -r /etc/nixos/apple-silicon-support /mnt/etc/nixos/
nixos# chmod -R +w /mnt/etc/nixos/
@end example

Now edit the newly generated configuration at
@file{/mnt/etc/nixos/configuration.nix} to import the
@file{./apple-silicon-support} directory. The beginning portion of the
file should look like this:

@example nix
  imports =
    [ # Include the results of the hardware scan.
      ./hardware-configuration.nix
      # Include the necessary packages and configuration for Apple Silicon support.
      ./apple-silicon-support
    ];

  # Use the systemd-boot EFI boot loader.
  boot.loader.systemd-boot.enable = true;
  boot.loader.efi.canTouchEfiVariables = false;
@end example

@subsection Peripheral firmware

Various non-free non-redistributable peripheral firmware files are
required to use system hardware like Wi-Fi. The Asahi Linux installer
grabs these from macOS and stores them on the EFI system partition
when it is created. The NixOS installer loads them from there while
booting so that all hardware is available during installation. By
default, the Apple Silicon support module will automatically reference
the files in the EFI system partition and incorporate them into your
configuration to be managed by the normal NixOS mechanisms.

Currently, the only supported way to update the peripheral firmware
files is to destroy and re-create the EFI system partition, so they
will not change unexpectedly.

If you do not want the impurity of referencing them (or are using
flakes where this is prohibited), copy them off the EFI system
partition (e.g. on the installation ISO).

@example
mkdir -p /mnt/etc/nixos/firmware
cp /mnt/boot/asahi/@{all_firmware.tar.gz,kernelcache*@} /mnt/etc/nixos/firmware
@end example

Then specify this path in your configuration in
@file{/mnt/etc/nixos/configuration.nix}:

@example nix
hardware.asahi.peripheralFirmwareDirectory = ./firmware;
@end example

You may also disable extraction and management entirely:

@example nix
hardware.asahi.extractPeripheralFirmware = false;
@end example

@subsection Keyboard layouts
Some keyboard layouts are not detected correctly. On some devices, the
@code{\} key is swapped with @code{`<`}, and @code{`~`} with
@code{`>`}. The layout can be fixed by setting options in
@code{boot.extraModprobeConfig}. Which option needs to be set depends
on your hardware keyboard's layout (see:
@url{https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Apple_Keyboard, Arch Wiki -
Apple Keyboard})

@example nix
 # For ` to < and ~ to > (for those with US keyboards)
 boot.extraModprobeConfig = ''
   options hid_apple iso_layout=0
 '';
@end example

@subsection MacBook models with a touchbar

If you have a MacBook model that has a
@url{https://support.apple.com/guide/mac-help/use-the-touch-bar-mchlbfd5b039/mac,
touchbar} you will also have to add this snippet to your configuration
to ensure that graphical sessions render on the main display and not
within the touchbar itself:

@example nix
hardware.apple.touchBar = @{
  enable = true;
  package = pkgs.tiny-dfr;
@};
@end example

@subsection Wireless networking

Use @code{iwd} in the configuration instead of @code{wpa_supplicant}
for Broadcom hardware support in Apple Silicon devices.

@example nix
networking.wireless.iwd = @{
  enable = true;
  settings.General.EnableNetworkConfiguration = true;
@};

# When using NetworkManager
networking.networkmanager.wifi.backend = "iwd";
@end example

@subsection Installing
Once you're satisfied with all your changes, you may install the NixOS configuration by running:

@example
nixos# nixos-install
[...]
setting root password...
New password: ***
Retype new password: ***
passwd: password updated successfully
installation finished!
@end example

Once completed, you can optionally @code{chroot} into the system using
@code{nixos-enter} to set a user password if you hadn't set one in
your configuration. If anything went wrong during the installation or
you wish to re-install a modified configuration, you can run
@code{nixos-install} again and restart the system when ready.

The machine is now set up to boot NixOS by default when turned on. To
access the boot picker, turn off the machine, then hold the power
button to turn the machine on instead of just pressing it. Let go once
the options come up. To boot a particular OS once, click on it, then
click Continue underneath it. To switch the default OS, click on the
desired default, hold Option (@code{Alt}), then click ``Always Use'' underneath
it.

@node Upgrading
@chapter Upgrading

To update the Apple Silicon support module, including the Asahi
kernel, U-Boot, and m1n1, you can simply download newer files from
this repo under apple-silicon-support and place them under
/etc/nixos/apple-silicon-support. Any changes will require a
configuration rebuild and reboot to take effect. If you wish to
customize your kernel, you can edit the kernel config in
/etc/nixos/apple-silicon-support/kernel/config. Consult the comments
in /etc/nixos/apple-silicon-support/kernel/default.nix and
/etc/nixos/apple-silicon-support/kernel/package.nix for more details.
Note that if the kernel device trees change, U-Boot will need to be
updated too.

U-Boot and m1n1 are automatically managed by NixOS' bootloader system.
If you roll back to a previous generation and things do not work
properly due to a device tree incompatibility, you can run
/run/current-system/bin/switch-to-configuration switch then reboot to
force the bootloader and the correct version of U-Boot/m1n1 to be
reinstalled and loaded.


@node Upgrading using channels
@section Upgrading using channels

If you want the Apple Silicon support module to be upgraded in tandem
with NixOS instead of manually downloading new files, you can add it
as a channel with the following command as root:

@example
nix-channel --add https://github.com/nix-community/nixos-apple-silicon/archive/main.tar.gz apple-silicon-support
@end example

Modify your @file{/etc/nixos/configuration.nix} to reference the
channel instead of the local files:

@example nix
  imports =
    [ # Include the results of the hardware scan.
      ./hardware-configuration.nix
      # Include the necessary packages and configuration for Apple Silicon support.
      <apple-silicon-support/apple-silicon-support>
    ];
@end example

You can now update and reboot into your new NixOS after updating your
channels and switching to the new configuration. Note that this will
track the latest development branch, so breaking changes may occur
between channel updates.

@node Rescue
@chapter Rescue

@node Rescue the system using the installer
@nodedescriptionblock
Re-using the installer to repair a non-functioning NixOS system
@end nodedescriptionblock
@section Re-installing the system using the installer

If something goes wrong and NixOS doesn't boot or is otherwise
unusable, you can first try rolling back to a previous generation.
Instead of selecting the default bootloader option, choose another
configuration that worked previously.

If something is seriously wrong and the bootloader does not work (or
you don't have any other generations), you will want to get back into
the installer. To start the installer with a system installed on the
internal disk, shut down the computer, re-insert the USB drive with
the installer, start it up again, hit a key in U-Boot when prompted to
stop autoboot, then run the command @code{bootmenu} and select the
@code{usb 0} entry. If no entries are available, exit and use
@code{bootmenu -e} instead. If this command is not available, instead
use @code{setenv boot_targets "usb" ; setenv bootmeths "efi" ; boot}.

Once in the installer, you can re-mount your root partition and EFI
system partition without reformatting them. Depending on what exactly
went wrong, you might need to edit your configuration, copy over the
latest Apple Silicon support module, or update U-Boot using the latest
installer.

Rerunning the installer will create a new generation but not touch any
user data. This means you can "undo" the installation by selecting a
previous generation in the bootloader. To redo the installation
without changing your root password or changing the version of
Nixpkgs, run:

@example
nixos-install --no-root-password --no-channel-copy
@end example

In extreme circumstances, you can delete the EFI system partition and
stub macOS install and rerun the Asahi Linux installer, then follow
the steps above to reinstall NixOS's bootloader menu. You will need to
regenerate the hardware configuration using @code{nixos-generate-config
--root /mnt} because the EFI system partition's ID will change. This
shouldn't modify your root partition or other NixOS configuration, but
of course it's always smart to have a backup. You might also wish to
re-copy the peripheral firmware files.

@node Rescue from boot failure with @code{idevicerestore}
@nodedescriptionblock
Using @code{idevicerestore} to fix boot failure.
@end nodedescriptionblock
@section Rescue from boot failure with @code{idevicerestore}

In extremely extreme circumstances (i.e. something messed up the
firmware partition, recovery partition, or partition table), your Mac
may fail to boot. On the Mac mini (and presumably Mac Studio), this
state is identifiable by a flashing orange power light indicating the
Morse code for SOS. On a Mac laptop, this state is identifiable by an
illustration of an exclamation point in a circle on the screen with a
link to Apple's website.

To make the Mac bootable again, you can use
@url{https://github.com/libimobiledevice/idevicerestore,
idevicerestore} from another Mac or Linux x86_64 or aarch64 VM or
computer that has an Internet connection. You will need a USB cable
with at least one USB-C end. This procedure has been tested with Mac
and Linux hosts restoring a Mac mini with macOS 12.4.

Please note that this procedure may require you to unrecoverably
destroy all data on the Mac's internal drive. If erasing is necessary,
you will be clearly warned and asked to confirm before it happens. The
drive will end up zeroed and its encryption keys (probably)
regenerated, so not even the NSA will be able to save you. If you
haven't made backups, make peace with yourself now.

To start the procedure, hook up the appropriate port on your
unbootable Mac to the second computer and invoke DFU mode. This
process is covered by Steps 1 and 2 of
@url{https://support.apple.com/guide/apple-configurator-mac/revive-or-restore-a-mac-with-apple-silicon-apdd5f3c75ad/mac,
Apple's documentation}. We will first try what Apple calls a "revive"
where the disk is not erased, although both we and
@code{idevicerestore} still call it a ``restore''.

If DFU mode was started correctly, the unbootable Mac will show up on
your second computer as an @code{Apple, Inc. Mobile Device (DFU Mode)}
in @code{lsusb} on Linux or System Information on macOS. If you see
@code{Apple, Inc. Apple Mobile Device [Recovery Mode]} instead (or
nothing), the procedure was not followed correctly and you need to try
again.

Open a terminal on your second computer. You need @code{usbmuxd} (only
if on Linux) and @code{idevicerestore}. nixpkgs (both unstable and
stable) provide sufficiently updated package versions. If you're on
NixOS, set @code{services.usbmuxd.enable = true;} to get udev rules,
system services etc. configured. If you're on another Linux, you need
to run @code{usbmuxd} as root in the background, without any arguments (or
manually set up udev rules and system services).

Then, ask @code{idevicerestore} to restore the firmware by using the
@code{--latest} flag. If you wish to erase the disk either because the
revive didn't work or because you want to start with a clean slate,
use the @code{--erase} flag also.

@example
sudo idevicerestore --latest
idevicerestore 1.0.0-unstable-2022-05-22
Found device in DFU mode
Identified device as j274ap, Macmini9,1
The following firmwares are currently being signed for Macmini9,1:
[...]
Select the firmware you want to restore:
@end example

Once @code{idevicerestore} detects the unbootable Mac, select the desired
firmware (usually number `1`) and wait patiently while the firmware is
downloaded; it's about 13GiB. If @code{idevicerestore} doesn't detect the
unbootable Mac, make sure that your cables are hooked up correctly,
that you used @code{sudo}, and that you are using a suitably recent
version.

The restore process will automatically start once the firmware is
downloaded and verified. If @code{idevicerestore} fails with the message
@code{ERROR: Device did not disconnect. Possibly invalid iBEC. Reset device
and try again.}, the unbootable Mac is likely not in DFU mode, or
there is something wrong with your system's udev related to hotplug
events. Check that you followed Apple's procedure correctly and that
the appropriate USB device is detected.

After 30 or so seconds of messages and status updates, you should see
the Apple logo on the unbootable Mac's screen with a progress bar and
@code{idevicerestore} will tell you that it is @code{Waiting for device to enter
restore mode...}. If the unbootable Mac resets after a couple minutes
and you get the message @code{ERROR: Device failed to enter restore mode.
Please make sure that usbmuxd is running.}, then @code{usbmuxd} is likely
not running. Start it and try again.

Once the restore process starts, the progress bar will start moving
and @code{idevicerestore} will spam lots of information about the process.
If it fails with @code{ERROR: Unable to restore device}, your only choice
may be to restart the process, but this time pass the @code{--erase} flag
to @code{idevicerestore} and destroy all data on the unbootable Mac's
internal drive.

Otherwise, wait patiently while the restore proceeds. Expect it to
take 20 or 30 minutes. Eventually @code{idevicerestore} will say @code{DONE} and
the formerly-unbootable Mac will reboot and start recovery mode (if
erasing was not necessary) or the out-of-the-box wizard (if the disk
was erased) and you can use it again.

Finally, shut down @code{usbmuxd} if on Linux and you started it manually.
To clean up your second computer, remove the downloaded firmware, the
@code{idevicerestore} and @code{usbmuxd} GC roots, and run the Nix garbage
collector:

@example
sudo killall usbmuxd # if on Linux
sudo rm -rf *.ipsw* UniversalMac*
rm -f result* usbmuxd idevicerestore
nix-collect-garbage
@end example

@node Un-installation
@chapter Un-installation

NixOS can be completely uninstalled by deleting the stub partition,
EFI system partition, and root partition off the disk.

Boot back into macOS by shutting down the machine fully, then pressing
and holding the power button until the boot picker comes up. Select
the macOS installation, then click ``Continue'' to boot it. Log into an
administrator account and open @code{Terminal.app}.

Identify the partitions to remove. In this example, @code{disk0s3} is the
stub because of its small size. @code{disk0s4} is the EFI system partition
and @code{disk0s5} is the root partition:

@example
% diskutil list disk0
/dev/disk0 (internal):
   #:                       TYPE NAME                    SIZE       IDENTIFIER
   0:      GUID_partition_scheme                         1.0 TB     disk0
   1:             Apple_APFS_ISC                         524.3 MB   disk0s1
   2:                 Apple_APFS Container disk4         900.0 GB   disk0s2
   3:                 Apple_APFS Container disk3         2.5 GB     disk0s3
   4:                        EFI EFI - NIXOS             512.8 MB   disk0s4
   5:           Linux Filesystem                         91.6 GB    disk0s5
   6:        Apple_APFS_Recovery                         5.4 GB     disk0s6
@end example

@quotation Warning
Unlike Linux, on macOS each partition's identifier does not
necessarily equal its partition index. Double check the identifiers of
your own system!
@end quotation

Remove the EFI system partition and root partition:

@example
% diskutil eraseVolume free free disk0s4
Started erase on disk0s4 (EFI - NIXOS)
Unmounting disk
Finished erase on disk0
% diskutil eraseVolume free free disk0s5
Started erase on disk0s5
Unmounting disk
Finished erase on disk0
@end example

Remove the stub partition:

@example
% diskutil apfs deleteContainer disk0s3
Started APFS operation on disk3
Deleting APFS Container with all of its APFS Volumes
[...]
Removing disk0s3 from partition map
@end example

Expand the main macOS partition to use the resulting free space. This
command will take a few minutes to run; do not attempt to use the
machine while it is in progress:

@example
% diskutil apfs resizeContainer disk0s2 0
Started APFS operation
Aligning grow delta to 94,662,586,368 bytes and targeting a new physical
store size of 994,662,584,320 bytes
[...]
Finished APFS operation
@end example

To complete the uninstallation, open the @code{Startup Disk} pane of
@code{System Preferences} and select your macOS installation as the
startup disk. If this is not done, the next boot will fail, and you
will be asked to select another OS to boot from.

@node Binary cache
@chapter Binary cache

Some components needed on Apple Silicon systems are rather big and
need a long time to build, specifically the kernel. This is why you
might consider using substitutes from a binary cache.

Our GitHub Actions workflow builds all of the declared packages every
time the main branch is pushed, and pushes all store paths to the
@code{nixos-apple-silicon} binary cache.

If you decide to use the nixos-apple-silicon binary cache, you can use
the following configuration snippet:

@example nix
nix.settings = @{
  extra-substituters = [
    "https://nixos-apple-silicon.cachix.org"
  ];
  extra-trusted-public-keys = [
    "nixos-apple-silicon.cachix.org-1:8psDu5SA5dAD7qA0zMy5UT292TxeEPzIz8VVEr2Js20="
  ];
@};
@end example

@node Who are you trusting by adding this binary cache
@section Who are you trusting by adding this binary cache

When using additional substituters in Nix/NixOS, you always trust the
actors who are involved or have access to the infrastructure for
populating the binary cache. No matter which packages you intend to
substitute over a binary cache, you should always assume that any of
the involved people could gain remote root-level access to your
system.

Currently, for the nixos-apple-silicon binary cache, the following
parties are involved:

@enumerate
@item
The NixOS Apple Silicon maintainers (Currently: @value{MAINTAINERS})
@item
The nix-community org admins
@item
Microsoft GitHub
@item
@url{https://namespace.so, namespace} for the GitHub Action Runners
@item
Cachix (for using their cachix/install-nix-action &
cachix/cachix-action in our CI)
@end enumerate

@node Release model/process
@chapter Release model/process

Development targets the @code{main} branch. Every feature PR targets
this branch.

After major fixes and features, we fully test the main branch and
create a release, tagged as a commit on the main branch with the
@code{release-YYYY-MM-DD} tag. These releases supply a known-working
installer image for new users.

@section Nixpkgs compatibility
The @code{nixos-apple-silicon} @code{main} branch is only tested to
work on NixOS unstable. It is updated to fix incompatibilities as they
arise.

Releases additionally represent a known-working commit of nixpkgs,
both that can build a correctly-functioning installer and that has
packages available which provide a proper user experience. However,
they are performed much less frequently than NixOS itself updates, so
many users may prefer to track the unstable branch directly and accept
occasional issues.

Whenever a new NixOS release happens, we branch off a
@code{release-YY.MM} branch, which is updated to reference the
corresponding stable NixOS commit. Users of NixOS stable are
encouraged to stay on this branch (instead of @code{main}). This
branch will only be updated to address breakages with the
corresponding NixOS stable release.

@section Release process
Releases on the @code{main} branch are performed by maintainers using
a PR against the branch. The PR must be tested as below and contain
the updates referenced below. It may contain e.g. installer fixes as
well. The PR should be approved by at least one other maintainer or
contributor before merging, though it does not need to be tested on
multiple machine types.

Stable releases are performed by maintainers first creating the branch
to point to current @code{main}. Then, a PR is created against the
branch for the release. This PR must contain the corresponding stable
commit, and needs to be tested for installed booting and
functionality. It does not need installer testing, nor a release date
update or tag. The PR should be approved by at least one other
maintainer or contributor before merging, though it does not need to
be tested on multiple machine types.

Finally, the NixOS Apple Silicon manual is updated to the specified
release date before creating a new release tag. In a following commit
post-release, the manual's version and release notes are updated to
that release plus a ``-next'' suffix to prepare for new changes for
the following release which can be added incrementally as they are
implemented.

@subsection Testing
@enumerate
@item
The installer image (@code{.#installer-bootstrap}) is built on both
@code{aarch64-linux} and @code{x86_64-linux}.
@item
The installer (ideally @code{x86_64-linux}) is transferred to a USB
drive, booted, and used to perform installation (i.e.
@code{nixos-install} is re-run, this does not need a disk reformat or
a re-run of the Asahi installer). This confirms the installer boots
and that networking, disk access, and USB are functional. Installers
for releases containing u-boot and m1n1 updates should be tested to
boot again after installation as those upgrades can cause USB
breakage.
@item Once installed, the system is booted and important features are tested.
@enumerate
  @item A desktop environment (e.g. KDE Plasma/GNOME) starts and programs work
  @item Networking connects
  @item Hardware accelerated rendering is used
  @item Speakers and microphone work
  @item Other items a user would expect
@end enumerate
@item
Small broken items can be additional commits in the release PR, large
items might need their own PR.
@end enumerate

@subsection Release

@enumerate
@item Once validated, a release date is picked (might not be date of final merge)
@itemize
   @item Update date and software versions in guide and README
   @item Write release notes including date
@end itemize
@item
PR is filed with above testing work and commits. It must be updated to
reference the current @code{main}! It should also reference the
machine used.
@item
If PR falls behind @code{main}, it is re-based or @code{main} is
merged into it
@item
After approval and merge, the merge commit on @code{main} is tagged
with the @code{release-YYYY-MM-DD} tag (filled in with release date)
and the installer is automatically built and uploaded.
@item
If the installer is not buildable in CI for some reason and a commit
to fix is needed, a new release (on a different day) should be done.
@end enumerate

@include release-notes.texi

@node Copying
@unnumbered Copying
@insertcopying

@bye
